# Open UI Telecon, January 5, 2023

## Agenda
* Move future telcons over to Jitsi meet? [#633](https://github.com/openui/open-ui/issues/633)
* [popup] Consider to add popupshowing, popupshown, popuphiding and popuphidden events [#342](https://github.com/openui/open-ui/issues/342)
* [popup] modals and toast stacking [#635](https://github.com/openui/open-ui/issues/635)
* SelectMenu placeholder capability? [#637](https://github.com/openui/open-ui/issues/637)

## Minutes
topic: Move future telcons over to Jitsi meet? #633
11:09 AM 
→ scotto joined (~scotto@536ebf46.public.cloak)

11:09 AM <miriam> 
present+
  
11:09 AM <una> 
Resolved: we'll try Jitsi for the next meeting
  
11:09 AM <scotto> 
present+
  
11:09 AM <dbaron> L. David Baron 
github: https://github.com/openui/open-ui/issues/633
  
11:09 AM 
— github-bot OK, I'll post this discussion to https://github.com/openui/open-ui/issues/633 (Move future telcons over to Jitsi meet?).
  
11:10 AM <una> 
RESOLVED: we'll try Jitsi for the next meeting
  
11:10 AM <masonf> 
github-bot take up https://github.com/openui/open-ui/issues/342
  
11:10 AM 
— github-bot Because I don't want to spam github issues unnecessarily, I won't comment in that github issue unless you write "Github: <issue-url> | none" (or "Github issue: ..."/"Github topic: ...").
  
11:10 AM <masonf> 
github-bot, take up https://github.com/openui/open-ui/issues/342
  
11:10 AM <github-bot> 
OK, I'll post this discussion to https://github.com/openui/open-ui/issues/342.
  
11:10 AM 
Topic: [popup] Consider to add popupshowing, popupshown, popuphiding and popuphidden events
  
11:10 AM 
— github-bot Successfully commented on https://github.com/openui/open-ui/issues/633
  
11:11 AM <una> 
masonf: Ollie from Mozilla requested this be reopen
  
11:12 AM 
masonf: issue is why don't we have one event before and one after, but I'd like to get Ollie to be able to present this, so would be happy to wait
  
11:13 AM <dbaron> L. David Baron 
s/Ollie/Olli/
  
11:13 AM <una> 
Action: will check if this is a time Olli (smaug----) can make before further discussion
  
11:13 AM 
— RRSAgent records action 1
  
11:14 AM <una> 
github-bot, take up https://github.com/openui/open-ui/issues/635
  
11:14 AM <github-bot> 
OK, I'll post this discussion to https://github.com/openui/open-ui/issues/635.
  
11:14 AM 
Topic: [popup] modals and toast stacking
  
11:14 AM 
— github-bot Successfully commented on https://github.com/openui/open-ui/issues/342
  
11:14 AM <una> 
masonf: the person who opened this is also not here today
  
11:14 AM 
masonf: the question here is about complex scenarios and stacking order
  
11:15 AM 
masonf: say you have a toast that wants to open a modal topmost dialog, which then shows another toast. If it shows another toast the previous would be on top of the other dialog. This issue is to set priorities and classes for popovers. In my view this is very akin to z-index and that arms race is what we're trying to avoid with popover
  
11:16 AM 
masonf: the ordering is based mostly around how toplayer works (last in = topmost)
  
11:16 AM 
tantek_ → tantek
  
11:16 AM <una> 
masonf: I think that's a good thing, but would love to hear other thoughts
  
11:16 AM <masonf> 
q?
  
11:16 AM 
— Zakim sees no one on the speaker queue
  
11:17 AM <una> 
scotto: it does seem odd to get into modals and toasts (which are really just messages or poss dialogs themselves), its a complicated issue/example
  
11:17 AM 
masonf: there are ways to force the issue with the existing API
  
11:17 AM 
masonf: you can briefly hide and show again if they're in the wrong order
  
11:18 AM 
scotto: if someone had a modal dialog and still firing off toast messages, are they even going to be accessible or visible?
  
11:18 AM 
scotto: if theres a backdrop on the dialog if its modal, will it be covering those up
  
11:19 AM 
scotto: arguably the toast messages could appear on top of the dialogs backfill, how would this even work on small screens
  
11:19 AM 
scotto: even if we figured out something to do this would get messy very quickly
  
11:19 AM 
masonf: as it curerntly stands, if you have a modal dialog and then you show a manual popover, the manual popover will be on top
  
11:19 AM 
masonf: it will be inert but visible
  
11:19 AM 
una: if its inert it's not accessible in that case
  
11:20 AM 
scotto: yes
  
11:20 AM 
masonf: my guess if if you're building a toast system, you likely have a toast container that you place things into and that resolves this entire issue
  
11:20 AM 
scotto: side issue about stuff like this in ARIA working group, how to make toasts or live region notifications work with modal dialog open
  
11:21 AM 
scotto: when modal is open everything is inert so that doesn't work
  
11:21 AM 
scotto: may just be a bad idea in general, why are you trying to share toast notifications at the same time you have a dialog open?
  
11:21 AM 
masonf: is there any conclusion on that? seems like the right thing to ignore those live regions in the case a dialog is open
  
11:22 AM 
scotto: if your modal dialog is complex enough you need to have toast notifications open at the same time, you may need to have a toast notification system inside your dialog
  
11:22 AM <JonathanNeal> 
Agreeing with what scotto and masonf are saying about modal dialog making all other things inert and thus the toasts are kind of inert by design.
  
11:22 AM <una> 
scotto: reminds me of another issue - notifications API where messages can be pumped through the browser instead of rely on live regions
  
11:22 AM 
scotto: instead of make authors render it in the DOM
  
11:23 AM 
scotto: that might be the real solution but off topic
  
11:24 AM 
una: this adds a lot of complexity, we shouldnt be adding complexity to solve for web experiences that are already bad for a11y
  
11:24 AM <masonf> 
q?
  
11:24 AM 
— Zakim sees no one on the speaker queue
  
11:24 AM <una> 
masonf: have not heard any supporting comments for making changes to this
  
11:24 AM 
JonathanNeal: +1 una, adding complexity for a worse a11y experience is a weak use case. need a stronger use case before adding it
  
11:25 AM <masonf> 
Proposed resolution: Don't change the API at this point to add popover "layers". That would add complexity and might harm accessibility.
  
11:25 AM 
Proposed resolution: Don't change the API at this point to add popover "layers". That would add complexity and might harm accessibility. Perhaps revisit in the future.
  
11:25 AM <una> 
Brecht: might be better to have a simpler approach, might be something to think about in the further future but not something necessarily in scope for now
  
11:26 AM <JonathanNeal> 
+1
  
11:26 AM <una> 
+1
  
11:26 AM <scotto> 
+1
  
11:26 AM <ScottKellum_> 
+1
  
11:26 AM <una> 
RESOLVED: Don't change the API at this point to add popover "layers". That would add complexity and might harm accessibility. Perhaps revisit in the future.
  
11:26 AM 
github-bot, take up https://github.com/openui/open-ui/issues/637
  
11:26 AM <github-bot> 
OK, I'll post this discussion to https://github.com/openui/open-ui/issues/637.
  
11:26 AM 
Topic: SelectMenu placeholder capability?
  
11:26 AM 
— github-bot Successfully commented on https://github.com/openui/open-ui/issues/635
  
11:27 AM <una> 
Sarah: in favor of this
  
11:28 AM <JonathanNeal> 
q+
  
11:28 AM 
— Zakim sees JonathanNeal on the speaker queue
  
11:28 AM <masonf> 
q+
  
11:28 AM 
— Zakim sees JonathanNeal, masonf on the speaker queue
  
11:28 AM 
→ sarah_higley joined (~sarah_higley@536ebf46.public.cloak)
  
11:28 AM <JonathanNeal> 
Scott is addressing my question.
  
11:28 AM 
Decorations.
  
11:28 AM <una> 
scotto: you mention placeholder prop like placeholder attribute like selectmenu, makes me think this would just accept text, are we saying people wouldn't be abel to have placeholder icons?
  
11:29 AM 
Sarah: was actually going to ask and discuss that, my personal opinion is text-only is fine
  
11:29 AM 
masonf: we haven't resolved what we're doing with non-text-only options in button anyway
  
11:29 AM 
masonf: that would affect how we support placeholder
  
11:30 AM 
masonf: if we're going just text as current protoype does, then text-only seems fine to me
  
11:30 AM 
JonathanNeal: the proposal has pseudo element that doesnt force you to make a descision. But on the attribute that's where we'd need to decide in the API
  
11:30 AM <dandclark> Dan Clark 
q?
  
11:30 AM 
— Zakim sees JonathanNeal, masonf on the speaker queue
  
11:30 AM <una> 
JonathanNeal: might end up with the issue that have an attribute that also needs to be a slot
  
11:30 AM 
ack JonathanNeal
  
11:30 AM 
— Zakim sees masonf on the speaker queue
  
11:30 AM <JonathanNeal> 
ack JonathanNeal
  
11:30 AM 
— Zakim sees masonf on the speaker queue
  
11:31 AM <JonathanNeal> 
+1 to having placeholder functionality
  
11:31 AM <una> 
masonf: not only that we want to do this, but we need to also discuss how to do it
  
11:31 AM <JonathanNeal> 
+1 to allowing `::placeholder`, too.
  
11:31 AM <dandclark> Dan Clark 
+1 to supporting it in some way
  
11:31 AM <una> 
scotto: would be nice to come up with an actual solution instead of people faking it like they need to do now
  
11:31 AM 
scotto: let's definitely do it, people want it
  
11:32 AM 
Brecht: the only thing i'm thinking about is using the pseudo would complicate things for multiple languages
  
11:32 AM 
dandclark: so far solution has been to make everything a part
  
11:32 AM <JonathanNeal> 
I’m hoping both selectmenu values and selectmenu placeholders can share a mostly symmetry API.
  
11:32 AM 
s/selectmenu values/selectmenu options
  
11:32 AM <una> 
dandclark: seems like the natural way to solve this as well
  
11:33 AM <JonathanNeal> 
s/symmetry/symmetric
  
11:33 AM <una> 
dandclark: maybe we should move forward with a resolution on if we should support this somehow before we determine how we should do it
  
11:33 AM 
scotto: _1
  
11:33 AM <JonathanNeal> 
Agreed with dandclark to support the concept, bikeshed the how separately.
  
11:33 AM <una> 
s/_1/+1
  
11:33 AM <JonathanNeal> 
+1 to keep talking about it after the initial resolution
  
11:33 AM <una> 
masonf: any objections to adding a placeholder functionality of some form?
  
11:33 AM 
- no objections -
  
11:34 AM 
RESOLVED: Add placeholder functionality of some sort
  
11:34 AM <dandclark> Dan Clark 
RESOLVED: `<selectmenu>` should support placeholder functionality in some form
  
11:34 AM <una> 
masonf: agree with dan re: using slots
  
11:34 AM 
masonf: my guess is placeholder slot would be inside the button slot
  
11:34 AM 
— dandclark sorry for doubling-up on the resolution una :)
  
11:34 AM <una> 
masonf: may be confusing if you replace the button element, all the placeholder functionality would go away, but maybe this isn't an issue
  
11:35 AM <JonathanNeal> 
My question about this is whether the `::part` targets the shadow `<slot>` or the thing I added the `slot` to. It’s the former, technically, I think. But it kinda feels like I would want the later.
  
11:35 AM <una> 
JonathanNeal: when i added slot attribute to my own button for decorations, when i add the attribute, it felt a little strange that the part API is not targetting the element that i've assigned
  
11:36 AM 
JonathanNeal: i didn't want it to not work that way at first but when I was using it, I wanted the part to style my element and not the display-contents slot container
  
11:36 AM 
masonf: this is the same issue in that the part is exposed in the shadow root and not on the slotted content itself - have done this manually in the implementation of selectmenu
  
11:37 AM 
masonf: the part is technically targetting the slot
  
11:37 AM <masonf> 
q?
  
11:37 AM 
— Zakim sees masonf on the speaker queue
  
11:37 AM <masonf> 
ack masonf
  
11:37 AM 
— Zakim sees no one on the speaker queue
  
11:38 AM <una> 
masonf: to push things along, any objections to move things along to design a slot-based placeholder functionality?
  
11:38 AM 
scotto: I do question how someone would do this if they were completely replacing the button and needing to add everything on their own
  
11:39 AM 
JonathanNeal: when im using this API and I'm using native attributes then its going to be a little confusing if i'm adding decorations but i'm hiding them by adding a text value to that, unless I use ARIA text-value?
  
11:39 AM 
JonathanNeal: example - I have rich content technically, but i want to represent that with a value, i.e. hex code of blue or word "five", but i want the value to be the color or number 5. I want a way to express that in my slotted content
  
11:40 AM 
JonathanNeal: would we expect that I use another global attribute like aria-value-text? Or another special prop
  
11:40 AM 
Sarah: I think this goes to what I brought up before because options can take richtext and images, we still need a plaintext attribute for them
  
11:40 AM 
Sarah: for stuff like type to jump to an option, we need to give options a way to define a plaintext alternative
  
11:41 AM 
masonf: the current prototype keeps using option element
  
11:41 AM 
Sarah: I don't thihnk we can do that with value - the form uses option value instead of human submitted value
  
11:42 AM 
Sarah: i.e. team wanted non-human-readable value for the DB, but wanted a human-readable value string text that had to be different than DB value
  
11:42 AM 
masonf: is there an issue open for that?
  
11:42 AM <JonathanNeal> 
q?
  
11:42 AM 
— Zakim sees no one on the speaker queue
  
11:42 AM <una> 
Sarah: not sure if there's another issue open for that
  
11:42 AM 
masonf: please look for or open that so we can discuss
  
11:43 AM <JonathanNeal> 
I want to set something like `aria-valuetext` but also the thing that would be `setFormValue`
  
11:43 AM <una> 
scotto: i can't navigate by options by typing any of the values (just stays on first option), so its not supported yet
  
11:43 AM 
Sarah: the one other consideration is if we have an editable selectmenu, i.e. another element that has a typeable combobox or autofill capability, would require string-only values
  
11:44 AM <JonathanNeal> 
Is my audio working?
  
11:44 AM <una> 
Related issue: https://github.com/openui/open-ui/issues/571#issuecomment-1293921725
  
11:44 AM 
— github-bot Because I don't want to spam github issues unnecessarily, I won't comment in that github issue unless you write "Github: <issue-url> | none" (or "Github issue: ..."/"Github topic: ...").
  
11:44 AM <una> 
JonathanNeal: we have a JS API for this with setFormValue
  
11:45 AM 
JonathanNeal: I also want this bc the need has been recognized for custom elements in the JS API
  
11:45 AM 
masonf: might copy paste that link into a new issue because this is related but it's a seperate topic
  
11:45 AM 
masonf: agreed to move forward with some sort of placeholder, tentative to use parts and slots, any objection to move along that route?
  
11:46 AM <JonathanNeal> 
+1 to prototyping
  
11:46 AM <una> 
dandclark: intermediate step can be to explore some options in protoype
  
11:46 AM 
masonf: i meant to comment in code snippets
  
11:46 AM 
dandclark: sounds good, agree
  
11:46 AM <JonathanNeal> 
+1 to code snippets, too; armchair prototyping.
  
11:46 AM <una> 
- no objections to exploring code snippets -
  
11:48 AM 
masonf: one more thing - we discussed issue #578 before - how the event works when popover shows and hides
  
11:48 AM 
github-bot, take up https://github.com/openui/open-ui/issues/578
  
11:48 AM <github-bot> 
OK, I'll post this discussion to https://github.com/openui/open-ui/issues/578.
  
11:48 AM 
Topic: [popup] It is error prone to have both async and sync 'hide' event
  
11:48 AM 
— github-bot Successfully commented on https://github.com/openui/open-ui/issues/637
  
11:51 AM <una> 
masonf: current behavior is beforetoggle happens mostly synchronously, and in the show case it can be canceled, can't be canceled in hide case. One case that isn't synchronous is when a popover is showing in the DOM and then that element is removed from the DOM, previously resolved that we would keep firing the event synchronously - last sticking point on the spec PR. question is - is that decision the right one? Should we fire any events?
  
11:51 AM 
Should it be async? Are there demos that show this particular case and could help us understand the problems with the current behavior
  
11:51 AM 
masonf: this is a very corner case, don't want to overcomplicate the API to make this one corner case easier
  
11:51 AM 
masonf: trying to understand how corner of a case this is
  
11:52 AM <JonathanNeal> 
I’m not joking about having a passive removal listener.
  
11:52 AM <una> 
masonf: my pushback has been that you can with existing APIs handle this situation, it just takes more work
  
11:52 AM 
masonf: i.e. mutationObserver or the existing event
  
11:52 AM <JonathanNeal> 
q?
  
11:52 AM 
— Zakim sees no one on the speaker queue
  
11:53 AM <una> 
JonathanNeal: when i'm designing something, i might want to account for a DOM removal event separately
  
11:53 AM 
JonathanNeal: a usecase is a library that adds and removes things from the DOM. Has other side effects, i.e. pausing videos
  
11:53 AM 
JonathanNeal: an option being a removal listener shouldnt be thrown out
  
11:53 AM 
JonathanNeal: I have to know the container, wheras a popup listener for open/close is on the element
  
11:54 AM 
JonathanNeal: I want a way to listen to that element's removal and then the issue of how things fire become more moot
  
11:54 AM 
masonf: you think its very important to keep firing the event is one point you're making
  
11:54 AM 
masonf: that is against the case of not firing the event
  
11:54 AM 
JonathanNeal: no i agree with that
  
11:55 AM 
JonathanNeal: i add an eventlistener when the popup is open. if i want to handle if the popup is removed i would add a similar api
  
11:55 AM 
masonf: you can use a mutationObserver on the parent element
  
11:55 AM 
JonathanNeal: i've tried this in many situations, and there's something very disconecting bw switching bw an event listener on the elem itself to a mutation observer
  
11:56 AM 
— dbaron q+
  
11:56 AM 
— Zakim sees dbaron on the speaker queue
  
11:56 AM <una> 
JonathanNeal: I would agree with your original point that it didn't need to fire if i had another way to listen to it
  
11:56 AM 
masonf: maybe there are 2 events here
  
11:56 AM 
masonf: it sounds like you're asking for a more general improvement to mutationobserver that watches for its removal
  
11:57 AM 
JonathanNeal: when i might remove something in my experience, it felt if i had this even ti wouldnt be trying to create a popup remove event
  
11:57 AM 
JonathanNeal: this one would be passive
  
11:57 AM 
JonathanNeal: i have to change my paradigm of thinking for this one use case
  
11:58 AM <JonathanNeal> 
Sorry for repeating myself so much. Thank you for listening!
  
11:58 AM <una> 
dbaron: one other thought about this set of problems is the risk of getting some of these events out of order when some are sync and some are async
  
11:58 AM 
dbaron: one thing that makes this much less scary is to be able to look at the state and see if the popup is open or closed
  
11:59 AM 
masonf: you can do this with a matches call
  
11:59 AM 
masonf: talked about making an attribute to add some syntactic sugar
  
11:59 AM 
dbaron: this seems good enough
  
11:59 AM <dbaron> L. David Baron 
(I don't have a strong opinion)
  
12:00 PM <una> 
masonf: mental model i've had is that this is a corner case, but there needs to be a way to detect that this has happened (that you've disconnected and are no longer showing), the current ways are cumbersome but there is a way
  
12:00 PM 
masonf: if there are further comments, please put them on #578 - this is the main blocker to the spec
  
12:00 PM 
— dbaron github-bot, end topic
  
12:00 PM 
— github-bot Successfully commented on https://github.com/openui/open-ui/issues/578
 
